Add Ubuntu Desktop workflows (#229)
ubuntu/ubuntu-project-docs: docs/contributors/patching/maintain-ubuntu-desktop-software.md

(maintain-ubuntu-desktop-software)=
# Maintain Ubuntu Desktop software

These are some common, day-to-day operations to build, maintain and package GNOME software for Ubuntu Desktop using the Git Build Package (`gbp`) workflow.

We'll use the `gnome-control-center` repository as an example.

:::{note}
Some applications on Ubuntu Desktop are developed outside of Salsa and GNOME. They have their own, separate workflows, which aren't described in this guide. The Desktop Team can help you find the right instructions on Matrix: [#desktop-dev:ubuntu.com](https://app.element.io/#/room/#desktop-dev:ubuntu.com).
:::

## Prerequisites

> Before you start, follow the instructions in {ref}`set-up-git-for-ubuntu-desktop-work`.

Author: Thanks @3v1n0, that's new to me, and the original guide didn't mention `sbuild` at all.

To make sure I understand, instead of building the package like this:

```
gbp buildpackage
```

You're supposed to build it like this:

```
gbp buildpackage -b --git-builder=sbuild resolute-amd64
```

Is that correct?

> Before you start, follow the instructions in {ref}`set-up-git-for-ubuntu-desktop-work`.

Reviewer: Yes, building locally is problematic because it provides you a polluted environment, and so both tests and build phase may be affected by the state of the machine

1. Fork the Git repository on Salsa.
1. Follow this guide and make the changes in your fork.
1. Open a Salsa merge request from your fork to the original repository.

In some projects, no Ubuntu branch has been created in a long time. You might have to ask the Debcrafters team to create the new branch for you. You can contact them [on Matrix](https://app.element.io/#/room/#devel:ubuntu.com) or [on the Canonical Mattermost](https://chat.canonical.com/canonical/channels/debcrafters).

## Local changes

With the suggested Git configuration, any non-committed changes (file modifications, additions or removal) halt the build because they won't be included. This is a safety reminder.

What you can do when you have such changes:

* Ignore them. The resulting package and build won't include those uncommitted changes. The `../build-area/<your-package>` directory will match the last commit.

    To do this, add the `--git-ignore-new` Git option

* Force using the current directory with your local modifications instead of the `build-area` directory, and include any local modifications to the package despite the `ignore-new` option.

>     For this, use the `--git-ignore-new --git-export-dir=""` Git options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For this, use the `--git-ignore-new --git-export=INDEX` gbp options.
```

> 

Author: Sounds good. Until I learn about better commands, I'm using your two suggestions.

> 

Author: Thanks @3v1n0. I'm not sure what use case we're trying to solve here. @quine00, should we just delete the step to remove local changes then?

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pull

    gbp:info: Fetching from default remote for each branch
    gbp:info: Branch 'upstream/latest' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'ubuntu/latest' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Updating 'pristine-tar': 2bed57f20816..e59ab7422a13
    ```

    The `pristine-tar` branch has been updated as referenced in `debian/gbp.conf`.

* If you have a separate `ubuntu/noble` branch, with its own `upstream/46.x` branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git checkout ubuntu/noble

    :input: gbp pull

    gbp:info: Fetching from default remote for each branch
    gbp:info: Branch 'ubuntu/noble' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'upstream/46.x' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'pristine-tar' is already up to date.
    ```

The `gbp pull` command, contrary to `git pull`, is a way to avoid checking out each branch and pulling them one by one. With `git pull`, you need to have the branch as the current checkout for potential conflicts when pulling.

## Push your Git changes to Salsa

> Contrary for pulling, we are using `git push` for this action. We push all branches tracking the `origin` repository that way. We don't need to be on the correct checkout, contrary to `gbp pull`. If you follow our recommended Git configuration, the command also pushes relevant tags. 

Author: Good idea.

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: git push
```

:::{admonition} TODO
:class: attention

> Is this it? Or do you need to specify the branch?

Author: Okay, I'll leave it up to the user to know what needs to be pushed and how.

* Build a binary package: 

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage
    ```

* Build a source package: 

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage -S
    ```

With the proposed configuration, the artifacts all end up in the `../build-area` directory, including the tarball, which is reconstructed from the `pristine-tar` + `upstream/latest` branch. The build directory is then cleaned up.

Useful tips in some potential cases:

* Don't purge the `build-area` directory after building:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage --git-no-purge
    ```

* Build current branch with local uncommitted modifications:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage --git-ignore-new --git-export-dir="" 
    ```

## Release a new version

:::{note}
If this is a sponsored upload, the sponsor performs these steps.
:::

1. Generate the changelog for native packages. For details, see {ref}`desktop-git-update-the-changelog`.

> 1. You might need to manually edit the `debian/changelog` file to properly group changes per people.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You might need to manually edit the `debian/changelog` file to improve its syntax and clarity.
```

The group by people is already done by `gbp dch`.

1. Finalize the changelog. On the corresponding branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: dch -r ""

    :input: git commit debian/changelog -m "Finalize changelog"
    ```

1. Build the binary and source package:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage --git-tag-only
    

>     :input: gbp buildpackage -S

Reviewer: This is creating the source package only.

    ```

1. Upload the files to the Debian package upload queue:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:

>     :input: dput ../build-area/….changes

Reviewer: I would explicitly mention the file name

```suggestion
    :input: dput ../build-area/…_source.changes
```

This is the most delicate part, where we're actually pushing data to ubuntu, so it's important to be checked.

Also the .changes file should be manually reviewed before uploading

    ```

    :::{admonition} TODO
    :class: attention

>     What's `../build-area/….changes`? Looks like a rendering artifact.

Author: Is the `…` character actually part of the file name?

    ```

    This pushes all needed branches, such as `ubuntu/latest`, and `pristine-tarball` + `upstream/latest` if this upload is a new upstream release.

(desktop-git-create-a-new-maintenance-branch)=
## Create a new maintenance branch

1. Find the latest version in common between the development release and that maintenance branch.

    Here, we'll use the `ubuntu/1%46.1-0ubuntu4` version tag as an example.

2. Create a branch from the start starting point.

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git branch ubuntu/noble ubuntu/1%46.1-0ubuntu4

    :input: git checkout ubuntu/noble
    ```

3. In the `debian/gbp.conf` file, change `debian-branch` to `ubuntu/noble`:

    ```{code-block} ini
    :caption: `debian/gbp.conf`

    debian-branch = ubuntu/noble
    ```

4. In the `debian/control` file, change `Vcs-Browser` to the branch's page on `https://salsa.debian.org/<package>/tree/<branch>`. For example:

    ```{code-block} ini
    :caption: `debian/control`

    Vcs-Browser: https://salsa.debian.org/gnome-team/gnome-control-center/tree/ubuntu/noble
    ```

    :::{admonition} TODO
    :class: attention

>     Should this really be `debian/control`, which says that it's auto-generated and you shouldn't edit it? Should you edit `debian/control.in` instead?

Author: Huh, you're right. I must have looked in the wrong repository by mistake.

>     Should this really be `debian/control`, which says that it's auto-generated and you shouldn't edit it? Should you edit `debian/control.in` instead?

Reviewer: `debian/control.in` is no longer used, but it's still potentially available in old packages.

It was generated by `dh-gnome` during `debian/rules clean`

---
relatedlinks: "[PackagingWithGit &#32; - &#32; Debian Wiki](https://wiki.debian.org/PackagingWithGit)"
---

(maintain-ubuntu-desktop-software)=
# Maintain Ubuntu Desktop software

These are some common, day-to-day operations to build, maintain and package GNOME software for Ubuntu Desktop using the Git Build Package (`gbp`) workflow.

> We'll use the `gnome-control-center` repository as an example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use the `gnome-control-center` repository as an example.
```

:::{note}
Some applications on Ubuntu Desktop are developed outside of Salsa and GNOME. They have their own, separate workflows, which aren't described in this guide. The Desktop Team can help you find the right instructions on Matrix: {matrix}`desktop-dev`.
:::

## Prerequisites

Before you start, follow the instructions in {ref}`set-up-git-for-ubuntu-desktop-work`.

> ## Team members, contributors and permissions

Reviewer 2: The heading doesn't seem to express what the section describes. How about:
```suggestion
## Workflow overview for external contributors
```

If you're a community contributor and not a member of the Ubuntu Desktop Team, you have to send your contributions through a merge request:

1. Fork the Git repository on Salsa.
1. Follow this guide and make the changes in your fork.
1. Open a Salsa merge request from your fork to the original repository.

In some projects, no Ubuntu branch has been created in a long time. You might have to ask the Desktop Team to create the new branch for you. You can contact them on Matrix at {matrix}`desktop-dev` or [on the Canonical Mattermost](https://chat.canonical.com/canonical/channels/desktop).

## Local changes

> With the suggested Git configuration, any non-committed changes (file modifications, additions or removal) halt the build because they won't be included. This is a safety reminder.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the suggested Git configuration, any non-committed changes (file modifications, additions, or removal) halt the build because they won't be included. This is a safety reminder.
```

What you can do when you have such changes:

* Ignore them. The resulting package and build won't include those uncommitted changes. The `../build-area/<your-package>` directory will match the last commit.

>     To do this, add the `--git-ignore-new` Git option

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    To do this, add the `--git-ignore-new` Git option.
```

* For example, on the `ubuntu/latest` branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pull

    gbp:info: Fetching from default remote for each branch
    gbp:info: Branch 'upstream/latest' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'ubuntu/latest' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Updating 'pristine-tar': 2bed57f20816..e59ab7422a13
    ```

    The `pristine-tar` branch has been updated as referenced in `debian/gbp.conf`.

* If you have a separate `ubuntu/noble` branch, with its own `upstream/46.x` branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git checkout ubuntu/noble

    :input: gbp pull

    gbp:info: Fetching from default remote for each branch
    gbp:info: Branch 'ubuntu/noble' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'upstream/46.x' is already up to date.
    gbp:info: Branch 'pristine-tar' is already up to date.
    ```

> The `gbp pull` command, contrary to `git pull`, is a way to avoid checking out each branch and pulling them one by one. With `git pull`, you need to have the branch as the current checkout for potential conflicts when pulling.

Reviewer 2: As the `git pull` command isn't recommended, the sentence seems extra.
```suggestion
The `gbp pull` command, contrary to `git pull`, is a way to avoid checking out each branch and pulling them one by one.
```

## Push your Git changes to Salsa

To contribute changes back to Salsa, push your changes using `gbp`:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: gbp push
```

(desktop-git-merge-a-new-upstream-version-to-latest)=
## Merge a new upstream version to latest

When upstream releases a new version of a given project, you can merge the version on the Debian and Ubuntu branches.

> 1. Switch to the branch where you want to import the new version, such as `ubuntu/latest`:

Reviewer 2: Maybe add info (link to info) on when to import to what branch.

    gbp:info: Importing '../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz' to branch 'upstream/latest'...
    gbp:info: Source package is gnome-control-center
    gbp:info: Upstream version is 46.2
    gbp:info: Replacing upstream source on 'ubuntu/noble'
    gbp:info: Successfully imported version 46.2 of ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz
    ```

1. Push all related branches:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp push origin
    ```

    The `gbp` tool handles all branches automatically. In the example of this upstream release, `gbp` pushes the `ubuntu/latest`, `pristine-tarball` + `upstream/46.x` or `upstream/latest` branches.

    Sync the affected upstream branch to Salsa, or push it to your fork and propose it as a merge request if you aren't an Ubuntu developer.

### Check for dependency changes

New upstream releases often change the dependencies of the application. Check for changes.

For example, if the application uses the Meson build system and you've updated from version `49.alpha` to `49.0`:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: git diff 49.alpha..49.0 -- meson.build
```

> Reflect the application changes in the package dependencies.

Reviewer 2: Add info (link to info) on how to do this?

> ### Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Troubleshooting
```

You might get the following errors when importing the tarball.

> #### Revision not found

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

#### Revision not found
```

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: gbp import-orig ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz

What is the upstream version? [46.2] 
gbp:info: Importing '../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz' to branch 'upstream/latest'...
gbp:info: Source package is gnome-control-center
gbp:info: Upstream version is 46.2
gbp:error: Import of ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz failed: revision '…' not found
```

The reason might be one of the following:

* You didn't get the latest commits and tags in your repository metadata. Fetch them:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git fetch upstreamvcs
    ```

> * Upstream has changed the tagging pattern. Update the `debian/gbp.conf` file to match it.

Reviewer 2: Add info (link to info) on how to do this?

    Find the exact tag:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git describe --tags --abbrev=0 upstreamvcs/main
    ```

    Specify the version manually:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp import-orig <tarball> --upstream-vcs-tag=<exact_version_tag>
    ```

#### Upstream tag already exists

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: gbp import-orig ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz

What is the upstream version? [46.2] 
gbp:error: Upstream tag 'upstream/46.2' already exists
```

This error means that Debian already has this tarball. Merge from Debian as described earlier.

## Merge a new upstream version to maintenance

When upstream releases a new version of a given project, you can merge the version on an Ubuntu maintenance branch.

If `main` has a newer version than the maintenance branch and you are the first one to deal with that case for that maintenance release, additional steps are required.

1. Open the `debian/gbp.conf` file.

>     Check if it sets the `upstream-branch=upstream/latest` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Check if the `debian/gbp.conf` file sets the `upstream-branch=upstream/latest` option.
```

1. Check if the `ubuntu/latest` branch has a newer upstream version than the one that you are importing, which was never imported.

    For example:

    - `ubuntu/latest` is on 46.2

>     - `ubuntu/noble` is on 46.1 and we want to update to 46.2

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - `ubuntu/noble` is on 46.1, and we want to update to 46.2.
```

>     - The `pristine-tar` log lists that 46.1 and 46.2 have been imported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - The `pristine-tar` log lists that 46.1 and 46.2 have been imported.
```

    - Consequently, the `upstream/latest` branch has upstream commits and tags for 46.1, 46.2 and corresponding `gbp` tags `upstream/46.1` and `upstream/46.2`.

1. If the option is present and `ubuntu/latest` is newer, proceed with the next steps.

    Otherwise, just follow these existing sections:
    
    1. {ref}`desktop-git-create-a-new-maintenance-branch`.
    1. Switch to the maintenance branch.
    1. {ref}`Merge a new upstream version <desktop-git-merge-a-new-upstream-version-to-latest>`, while on the maintenance branch.

1. Switch to the maintenance branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git checkout ubuntu/noble
    ```

> 1. Create a new `upstream/<series>` branch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a new `upstream/<series>` branch:
```

>     You need to checkout the latest version of `upstream/latest` in your maintenance branch. In this example, it's `upstream/46.1`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Checkout the latest version of `upstream/latest` in your maintenance branch. In this example, it's `upstream/46.1`:
```

1. Fetch from upstream:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git fetch upstreamvcs
    ```

1. Download the upstream tarball.

1. Import the tarball:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp import-orig ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz
    ```

1. Push your changes, including the new branch that you want to track:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp push origin
    ```

1. Push the `upstream` and `pristine-tar` branches to Salsa.

    You can push directly to the GNOME branch if you have the permissions. Otherwise, push to your personal fork and prepare a merge request.

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp push origin
    ```

## Refresh patches

Before merging with an upstream release, refresh the patches.

1. Rebase the `pq` branch:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pq rebase
    ```

1. Use the Git rebase tools to refresh the patches.

> ### Troubleshooting

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

### Troubleshooting
```

The rebase might not work in certain cases, such as if you're merging with an `upstream/x.z.y` tag or if you didn't create the `patch/queue` branch first. In those cases, follow these steps:

1. Switch to the corresponding branch.

1. If the `patch-queue` branch exists, remove it:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pq drop
    ```

> 1. Try to find the earliest point where the patches still apply. Increase the value until you don't find the previous release commit:

Reviewer 2: Do I understand it correctly that the following should be said?

```suggestion
1. Try to find the earliest point where the patches still apply. Increase the value until you find the previous release commit:
```

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pq import --force --time-machine=30
    ```

>     Replace `30` with a number that determines how far in history you want to look for the patches. The exact number depends on the size of your repository. Larger numbers provide better results but the search gets increasingly slow so start small.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Replace `30` with a number that determines how far in history you want to look for the patches. The exact number depends on the size of your repository. Larger numbers provide better results, but the search gets increasingly slow, so start small.
```

> 1. Re-apply the `debian/patches/series` file on top of the new upstream code, stopping for manual action if is needed:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Re-apply the `debian/patches/series` file on top of the new upstream code, stopping for manual action if needed:
```

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp pq rebase
    ```

1. If a patch doesn't apply cleanly, fix it:

    1. Resolve the conflict using `git add` and `git rm`.
    1. Proceed with `git rebase --continue`.

> 1. If the `--time-machine` step or `gbp pq rebase` fail, you can import the patches into the `pq` branch manually from a file:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If the `--time-machine` step or `gbp pq rebase` fail, import the patches into the `pq` branch manually from a file:
```

    ointer (5 minutes ago)
    * da06252e1 - [PATCH 4/4] thunderbolt: move to the 'Devices' page (5 minutes ago)
    * 2c9f5bcbb - [PATCH 3/4] thunderbolt: new panel for device management (5 minutes ago)
    * 660e9e633 - [PATCH 2/4] shell: Icon name helper returns symbolic name (5 minutes ago)
    * a78ae89dd - [PATCH 1/4] shell: Don't set per-panel icon (5 minutes ago)
    […]
    ```

    This is similar to using `git log` to browse the commits, which also works.

1. Add or modify patches:

    * Modify the software. Fix a bug or add a new feature. This will be the content of your new patch.

        When you commit your changes, every new commit turns into a separate patch applied at the end of the `debian/patches/series` file. The commit description will be then converted to the patch description.

        If you want to build a package with the current content without having to switch your branch, use the following command:

        ```{terminal}
        :copy:
        :host:
        :dir: gnome-control-center
        :user:
        :input: gbp buildpackage -b --git-ignore-new --git-export=INDEX
        ```

>     * Reorder your patches. If you don't want this patch to be the last one, you can use an interactive Git rebase:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Reorder your patches. If you don't want this patch to be the last one, use an interactive Git rebase:
```

        ```{terminal}
        :copy:
        :host:
        :dir: gnome-control-center
        :user:
        :input: git rebase -i ubuntu/latest
        ```

>         There, you can reorder the patches as commits, amend or stash them. Removing a commit also removes the patch from the `debian/patches/series` file.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        There, reorder the patches as commits, amend or stash them. Removing a commit also removes the patch from the `debian/patches/series` file.
```

    
    * Remove or edit patches. Any change to the commits will result in the same change to the patch files.

>         For example, you can use Git amend to modify the commit history. For details, see [Git Tools - Rewriting History](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Rewriting-History).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        For example, you can use Git commit with the `--amend` option to modify the commit history. For details, see [Git Tools - Rewriting History](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Rewriting-History).
```

    :user:
    :input: gbp pq export --no-patch-numbers
    ```

1. Update the changelog. For details, see {ref}`desktop-git-update-the-changelog`.

1. Commit the changes:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git add debian/patches/* debian/changelog

    :input: git commit
    ```

For details about `gbp pq`, see {ref}`desktop-git-add-or-modify-patches`. 

(desktop-git-update-the-changelog)=
## Update the changelog

You can edit the `debian/changelog` file manually but it's recommended to use the following command instead:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: gbp dch
```

By default, this command adds the first line of every commit to the changelog. You can adjust this behavior by including a string at the end of your commit message:

`Gbp-Dch: Full`
: Add this full commit message, not just the first line.

`Gbp-Dch: Ignore`
: Skip this commit in the changelog.

Alternatively, you can include all the commit descriptions:

```{terminal}
:copy:
:host:
:dir: gnome-control-center
:user:
:input: gbp dch --full
```

Then, filter them out by hand at the commit phase.

> ## Import an Ubuntu upload tracked outside of VCS

Reviewer 2: Is any other VCS but Git ever used?
```suggestion
## Import an Ubuntu upload tracked outside of Git
```

You can import a Debian Source Control (DSC) source package as a tarball, even if it doesn't exist in the Git version tracking system (VCS).

1. Downloading the source tarball.

    You can download the tarball that belongs to an Ubuntu release, like Noble:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: pull-lp-debs --download-only gnome-control-center noble

    Found gnome-control-center 1:46.7-0ubuntu0.24.04.3 in noble
    Downloading gnome-control-center_46.7-0ubuntu0.24.04.3.dsc from archive.ubuntu.com (0.004 MiB)
    ```

    Or you can download the tarball based on a package version:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: pull-lp-debs --download-only gnome-control-center 46.7-0ubuntu0
    ```

1. Switch to the branch where you want to place this Ubuntu upload.

1. Import the tarball:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp import-dsc ../gnome-control-center_46.1-0ubuntu5.dsc
    ```

> 1. If there had been changes in your tree, importing the latest tarball reverted all previous changes in the VCS.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. If there had been changes in your tree, importing the latest tarball reverted all previous changes in Git.
```

:::

1. Generate the changelog for native packages. For details, see {ref}`desktop-git-update-the-changelog`.

1. You might need to manually edit the `debian/changelog` file to improve its syntax and clarity.

1. Finalize the changelog and specify the Ubuntu release:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: dch -r "" --distribution noble

    :input: git commit -m "Upload to Noble" debian/changelog
    ```

1. Tag the package:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage --git-tag-only --git-ignore-new
    ```

1. Build the source package:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage -S
    ```

    If this version hasn't appeared in the `main` repository yet, include both the Ubuntu and Debian part of the changelog in the `.changes` file, which is generated by `dpkg-genchanges`. Add the `-vX` option to include all Debian and Ubuntu versions greater than `X`:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp buildpackage -S -vX
    ```

> 1. Check the `../build-area/<your-package>.changes` file to make sure that it's correct. This file instructs `dput` which files to upload, and provides a high-level view of the changes such as the latest changelog entries.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Check the `../build-area/<your-package>.changes` file to make sure that it's correct. This file instructs `dput` which files to upload and provides a high-level view of the changes, such as the latest changelog entries.
```

        […]
    ```

1. If the version already exists in Debian, use Debian's upstream branch tags:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git merge upstream/46.2 -m "Update upstream source from tag 'upstream/46.2'"
    ```

    Push the `upstream` and `pristine-tar` branches to Salsa:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git push --follow-tags
    ```

### Add the maintenance version in Debian

If the version doesn't exist in Debian yet, add it to Debian and Ubuntu using an upstream tarball.

1. Fetch from upstream:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git fetch upstreamvcs
    ```

1. Download the upstream tarball.

1. Import the tarball:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: gbp import-orig ../gnome-control-center-46.2.tar.xz
    ```

1. Push your changes, including the new branch that you want to track:

    ```{terminal}
    :copy:
    :host:
    :dir: gnome-control-center
    :user:
    :input: git push

>     :input: git push -u upstream/46.x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    :input: gbp push origin
```
